## The main function 
- The entry point for C++ programs 
- invoked by the operating system
- The default main function generated by Visual Studio 
```c++
int _tmain(int argc, _TCHAR* argv[]){
	return 0;
}
```
- The first int parameter "argc" is indicating the number of command line arguments and the pointer TCHAR is pointing to an array of those arguments. 
- this can be simplified, if you do not wish to process command line arguments
```c++
int main(){
	return 0;
}
```

- Main return an integer value. 0 indicates the program terminated normally and any other value indicates an error. How the return value is handles is Operating System dependent. 
- The C++ main function does not need to be placed in a class like C# or Java. 

## Pausing the Console Window
- Selecting the *Debug->Start Debugging* menu option or *Start Debugging* button from within VS, will execute the program but not pause it on completion.
- This results in the window closing after the code within main has executed and your not being able to see the output. 
- to avoid this either select *Debug->Start Without Debugging*  add the system pause instruction to main, just above the return 0.
```c++
int main(){
	system("pause");
	return 0;
}
```


### #include 
- A Mechanism that allows code located in one file to access code located in other files 
- a pre processor directive that precedes a file name
- the contents of the included file are treated as if they were embedded within file in which the directive is placed. 
```c++
#include <path_filename>
#include "path_filename"
```
- <> search for the file in the directory designated as the include directory within the IDE. 
- "" instructs the processor to look for the file in the same directory as the source file containing the directive ad if not present the designated IDE include directory. 
- "" if a full path is specified then the preprocessor will only look in that directory. 
- The standard is that include statements with <> only reference code provided with the standard library included in C++. include statements of type "" are for code written by the developer. 
### #include header files
- your project will contain many files 
- some of these will be header files (.h) that contain code that may be required by other files in the project. 
- you must explicitly indicate that a file requires that code in a header file. 
	```c++
	#include "filename.h"
```
- the include directive should be invoked within the file that requires access to the definitions within the header file. 
```c++
	#include "myvars.h"
```
- a semicolon after the file name is optional. 

## Namespaces 
- an identified declarative region that avoids naming conflicts. 
- Identifiers are accessed using the scope operator ::
```c++
namespace myFirstNamespace{
	int a = 10;
}
namespace mySecondNamespace{
	int a =12;
}

int main(){
	int c = myFirstNamespace::a + mySecondNamespace::a;
	std::cout << c << std::endl;
	using myFirstNamespace::a;
	c = a + mySecondNamespace::a;
	std:: cout << c << std::endl;
}
```
- the *using* keywords avoids having to scope each object within the namespace. 
- Classes, standalone functions etc. can be placed in a namespace. 
- General rule is to only use namespaces when the code is to be used by third parties. thus avoiding potential naming conflicts (name pollution)
- All components in the C++  Standard Library are located within the std namespace. 
- To avoid qualifying each object with std:: we can state which namespace we are using. In the example below this is placed in global scope. 
```c++
#include "iostream"
using namespace std;
```

## Comments 
- // Single line comment 
- /* Paired comments for multiple lines*/

## Output 
- cout is an object of the ostream class 
- ostream being the standard output stream
- The standard output is usually being the console. 
- Data is output using the *insertion operator <<* 
```c++
#include "iostream"

int main() {
	int c = 10;
	std::cout<<c;
	return 0;
}
```
- *iostream* is an Object Oriented library that implements I/O (input/output) operations.
- cout ostream is declared within the *std* namespace. 
- cout is an object not a method. 


## Input 
- cin is an object of the istream class. Standard input stream.
- the standard input usually being the keyboard
- Date is retrieved using the *extraction operator >>*
```c++
#include "iostream"

using namespace std;

int main(){
	int c;
	cin >> c;
	cout << c << endl;
}
```

- the using statement avoids have to prefix each cin / cout with std::
- endl (short for end line) generates a new line (flushing the buffer).
- When using cin with string only the first word is captured. 
- the neat thing about input with C++ is you do not have to convert data types with input. so if you input an integer for an int variable it remains an integer. With other languages like C# console.readline takes in all inputs as a string so then you have to convert to your preferred data type afterwards. 

## Variable & Types 
- Valid identifier's name consist of one or more digits, letters or the underscore character.
- Must begin with a letter or underscore 
- Not be a reserved word. 
- they are Case Sensitive 
- a variable has an associated type. 
- some common types are listed below. 
- there are unsigned equivalents also 

| Name  | Description            | Size   | Ranges                |
| ----- | ---------------------- | ------ | --------------------- |
| char  | Character or small int | 1byte  | -128 to 127           |
| int   | Integer                | 2bytes | -32768 to 32767       |
| bool  | Boolean value          | 1byte  | True or Fale (1 or 0) |
| float | Floating point number  | 4bytes | +/-3.4e+/-38          |

## typedef 
- Allows the creation of an alias for a type. 
- The alias can be used as if it was a C++ type. 
```c++
typedef type aliasName;
```
- This is not creating a new type. Simply providing an alternative name for the type. 
- Commonly used to improve the readability of the code. 
```c++
typedef int Mark;
Mark studentMark = 75;
```
- Very useful tool when used with function pointers that have a complex type. 

## Defining a Variable 
- C++ is strongly typed 
- All variable must be defined
```c++
	char gender;
	int age;
	bool married;
	float height;
```
- Integer types cane be unsigned or signed. By default an integer is signed. 
```c++
	unsigned int age;
	signed int score; 
```
- Variables of the same type can be defined within a single statement. 
```c++
	int a,b,c;
```

## Initializing a Variable 
- The initial value of a local variable is undetermined 
- Variable can be initialized immediately after definition. Initialization using the = symbol is know as copy initialization or explicit assignment. 
```c++
	char gender = 'M';
	int age = 21, children = 2;
	bool married = false;
	float height = 1.85;
```
- Alternatively using direct initialization syntax (implicit assignment)
```c++
	char gender('M');
	int age(21);
	bool married(false);
	float height(1.85);
```


## Scope 
- Global Variable are defined outside of a function / class.
- By prefixing the definition with static the scope is restricted to the file. 
- Local variables have automatic duration. They are destroyed when the block of code they are defined in goes out of scope. 
```c++
int n1 = 30; //Global scope 

static int n2 = 40; // File scope 

void f() {
	int n3 = 50; // Local scope cannot use n3 outside of f()
	cout << n1 << endl;
	cout << n3 << endl;
}

int main() {
	cout << n1 << endl;
	cout << n2 << endl;
	return 0;
}
```

## String Type 
- A Class defined within the *string* library 
- Within the std namespace
```c++
#include <string>
using namespace std;

string name = "Rex Justesen";
```
- strings can be treated as arrays of characters 
```c++
char firstLetter = name[0];
```
- The number of characters ins the string is returned by the length() member function 
```c++
int numberChars = name.length();
```
- Compare strings using the comparison operator ==
- Strings are not a standard primitive type but as a class so it has attributes and functions that are very useful. 

## Constants 
- A value inserted into the code is a literal constant
```c++ 
int age;
age = 21;
```
- in the above code 21 is a literal constant 
- constants can be defined by prefixing the definition with the *const* keyword.
```c++
const int RETIRE_AGE = 65;
```
- By convention constants names are written in upper case. 
- Constants are really useful for values that must remain the same throughout the duration of a program. 

## Addresses 
- the computers memory consists of memory cells in which the variable's value is stored. 
- Each memory cell has a unique address. 
- The cells are given consecutive addresses.
- the data value stored in the address is known as the *rvalue*
- the address itself is known as the *lvalue*.
- the OS decides at what address the variable will be stored when the variable is defined. 
- We can access this address through the reference operator *&* 
```c++
int age(21);
cout << &age << endl; // displays 0013FF54 on my PC
```

## Pointers 
- A pointer is a variable that contains the memory address of a variable. 
- Pointers are defined using the asterisk symbol. 
- The type of the pointer is the type of the variable the pointer points to. 
```c++
// ways to define pointst 
type* PointerName;
type *PointerName;
type * PointerName;
```

- After definition, the pointer does not contain a valid address. Its contents are undetermined. 
- Pointers should always be initialized. 
```c++
Type * PointerName = 0;
```
- If the address is unknown at definition, assign 0 as there is no address 0
```c++
int age(21);
int *ptrToAge = 0;

ptrToAge = &age;

cout << ptrToAge << endl; // displays 0013FF54 on my PC
```
- When declaring more than one pointer of the same type repeat the *
```c++
int *a, *b, *c;
```

- Through the pointer we can access the value within the variable whos address is stored in the pointer. 
- the *dereference* operator * precedes the pointer to return the variables value. 
- The dereference operator translates to "value pointed by".
```c++
int age(21);
int *ptrToAge;

ptrToAge = &age;

cout << *ptrToAge << endl; //displays 21
```

Diagram to Visualize Pointers 

Computer Memory

| Address | Type  | Identifier | Value |
| ------- | ----- | ---------- | ----- |
| 1000    | int   | age        | 21    |
| 1001    | float | height     | 1.8   |
| 1002    | bool  | married    | true  |
| 1003    | int*  | pAge       | 1000  |
```c++
int age = 21;
float height = 1.8;
bool married = true;
int* pAge = &age;
cout << &age <<" "<<pAge<<" "<<*pAge<<endl; //Displays 1000 1000 21
```



